# cardiovascular-systems
## Noninvasive Diagnostics for early intervention and post-MI followup.   
I have several US patents on early and noninvasive detection of atherosclerosis, the cause behind heart attacks and strokes. It is my goal to refine my earlier method to build a simple and low cost system for providing relevant health care alerts sufficiently ahead of time to prevent adverse events, both before and after a myocardial event.    

1. First, I gained familiarity with the physionet databases ('PhysioBank') available here: https://www.physionet.org/physiobank/about.shtml . Linux installation instructions for their open source software are provided here: https://www.physionet.org/physiotools/wfdb-linux-quick-start.shtml . Here is a reference paper on the database and toolkit: http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/23/e215.full . I have installed their software on my Ubuntu system. I downloaded and saved their script for downloading relevant ECG datasets. It is called Make-Data. Save it with .sh extension. I then installed the 15 datasets with this command: bash Make-Data.sh
Their latest version does not contain plt and lw-cat required to convert .txt files into PDFs, which depict the data as a waveform. However, we can download them directly from this site: https://www.physionet.org/challenge/chaos/ or double click them there itself on any of the PDF documents to visualize the data. I used the following bash command (learning Linux...): wget -r -A.pdf https://www.physionet.org/challenge/chaos/a1nn.pdf to download one of the pdfs. I used that template to download all of them using a for loop. First, I created a blank file with  touch getpdf.sh. Then, I opened it using gedit getpdf.sh and created a for loop. Inspiration from these two sites: https://www.question-defense.com/2010/12/22/use-wget-to-download-all-pdf-files-listed-on-a-web-page-wget-all-pdf-files-in-a-directory and https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/bash-for-loop/. I executed it with bash getpdf.sh. File uploaded here.
2. The chaos competition of 2008 contains HR interval data (n=15) with 5 each from AF (a series), normal (n series), and CHF (c series) subjects. A special issue of the 'Chaos' journal in 2009 covered many approaches to discriminate among these groups. Dr. Glass provided an enlightening discussion on whether the normal heart rate is chaotic. I will provide here a summary of his comments and criteria, and developments since then. There was mention of a A T-wave -based approach that was different from others. They studied 107 patients with CHF and followed them for up to 18 months, until a total of 13 events had occurred. T-wave alternans was evaluated during an exercise stress regimen. it was defined as: positive, if sustained alternans was present with heart rate at onset of 70% or less of maximum predicted heart rate. All the patients with eventual events had positive (11) or indeterminate (2) ratings. However, the physionet data contains only RR intervals and not amenable to this analysis.  I plan to analyze the data using conventional techniques to confirm some of the conclusions in that special issue. Code will be included here.

3. The following two articles integrate molecular and system level perspectives on extracellular matrix (ECM), the characteristics of which form the basis for my method and patents: "Vascular Extracellular Matrix and Arterial Mechanics" by J. E. Wagenseil and R. P. Mecham, 2009, use comparative physiology to showcase the role of pulsatile flow and smooth muscle cells in appropriate ECM synthesis. They show that cardiac and vascular development are physiologically coupled. They identify a universal elastic modulus value that controls the ECM synthesis. "Dynamic cell-to-cell-ECM interactions in the heart" by C. M. Howard and T.A. Baudino,2014, focusses on remodeling of the cardiovascular system following a pathological stress (such as hypertension and MI). Dynamic shifts in various cardiac cell populations impact ECM synthesis and degradation. Insight gained may help develop new therapeutic targets and artifical blood vessels. it is my intention to use the details provided in these articles to define a network architecture and use that as the framework to learn rentrez (R version of Entrez tools - see another Github repo) and acquire relevant data and literature. 
4. Two other articles are of interest: (a) "Extracellular matrix gene expression in the developing mouse aorta" by McLean, Mecham, and others; it is a chapter in a book entitled "Extracellular Matrix in Development and Disease", Joseph A Miner (Ed.), 2005. (b) "A constrained mixture model for growth" by Humphrey and Rajagopal, 2002.  The first item has detailed tables of all the genes involved in the development of the mouse aorta. The second item provides the basic definitions of the terms in ECM domain, as relevant to growth, maintenance,and degradation of ECM. These will be summarized here. The tabular lists will also be incorporated in the rentrez code (to be included here).   
5. AHA has published a scientific statement on "Cardiovascular Disease and Breast Cancer" in Circulation 2018. [Link](http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/early/2018/01/31/CIR.0000000000000556). Some genetics related comments from the paper: We have not been able to identify a single gene responsible for a substantial proportion of CVD, as with relationship of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to breast cancer. Animal studies showcase the role of these genes in cardiac injury responses and development of HF after anthracycline exposure. Human studies did not show a higher risk of myocardial dysfunction after breast cancer treatment with doxorubicin (an anthracycline). Cancer treatment can result in early or delayed cardiotoxicity (HF, HT, arrhythmias, MI, vulvula disease, thromboembolism, pulmonary HT, and pericarditis). LVEF is used to idenfity patients with cardiotoxicity. But it is a late manifestation. Biomarkers as risk markers for cardiotoxicity: Troponin I is a specific marker of myocardial injury. A rise in its value within 3 days of high dose chemotherapy has excellent negative predictive value on LVEF. There is a lack of consensus on N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP)'s role. In a small study, high sensitivity Troponin I and myeloperoxidase improved risk prediction of the first cardiotoxic event. A change in longitudinal strain and troponin I at 3 months after chemotherapy was predictive. Exercise training may not help with reduced LVEF. Several organizations (American College of Cardiology - the Cardio-oncology section, and counterparts in Canada, Europe, and at the international level) are encouraging collaboration of these two disciplines. 
6. For Sequence variants, [here](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK143764/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK143764.pdf) is the link to the NCBI book entitled "NCBI Handbook 2018." There is other info on databases including ClinVar and dbGaP. They all probably require one to submit a research proposal to get access to de-identified genotype-phenotype data. How-To for BLAST, Entrez, etc are also included here. 
7. Some of the sites clearly require certain level of [CITI](https://about.citiprogram.org/en/homepage/) (Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative) because of privacy and security considerations and re-identification potential for genomic data. In addition to standard certifications (for Biomedical Research Investigators and Social & Behavioral Research Investigators, to conduct research studies), I also have gained certification in "Data or specimens Only Research" - which is needed to access the Physionet databases (and perhaps dbGap). There seems to be other relevant certifications to obtain on: HIPS (Health Information Privacy and Security) for Clinical Investigators and Good Clinical Practice) at a later time, to actually initiate and conduct clinical research. 

